So far,
we've seen how to apply web performance.
We create a website, right,
then you are attending this workshop,
you are watching this course, and
then you learn to measure things,
you apply some techniques that we
have been seeing to see if that,
I mean, preload, DNS prefetch, 14K.
And then, you go back,
make changes, measure, okay,
that's kind of one thing, which is okay.
We do that in the lab, okay?
We iterate over this many
times until you go and deploy.
When you deploy, that goes to the user.
It shouldn't, I mean,
web performance optimization
shouldn't stop with the deployment.
You should also measure
real user metrics and
do two things,
make decisions on the fly for that user,
that's why I mentioned
reactive web performance.
So for example, if the latency is too
high, well, let's decrease the amount of
data or let's make only one request and
try to bring many things at once.
And also, with those measurements,
we can go back to apply techniques.
We can gather real user metrics and
make new decisions that will make
changes to the code as well.
So that's how your performance
process should look like.
So it's not just static performance,
also dynamic performance on the fly, okay?
The APIs, as we will see,
work client-side.
Some data that you get there can be
share with the server automatically or
manually, and as every API in
the web world is not available,
some APIs will not be available
in every browser, okay?
So sometimes, we have polyfills,
that's a library that will simulate,
will fill the gap that we have
on some browsers, and for
that, we can measure timings.
What is timing?
Remember the waterfall chart?
We could recreate the waterfall
chart in a JavaScript structure.
So all the information you see in
the waterfall chart can be accessed by
JavaScript, by a JavaScript API.
For what?
For what you need.
You can read type of connection,
bandwidth latency, device memory, and
you can create your own custom
metrics with these APIs.
You can read paint timings such
as first-contentful-paint,
large-contentful-paint, and
CPU-intense operations such as,
remember the dimension long tasks,
these tasks that are taking more than 50
milliseconds, you can get warned every
time you're going over that line.
So then, you can gather real user
metrics for that user, for that CPU,
for that device,
we might have a long task problem.
So that's known as real user monitoring or
ROM, because we don't
know how users are working with our site,
just working with our lab, okay?
So it's a good idea to take analytics.
Of course,
there are a lot of providers out there,
companies, where you inject the code and
they will do that for you.
They have nice dashboards, alerts,
but also, you can do it yourself,
and I will just give you a hint of some
ideas that you can use for the APIs.
There are many APIs,
we are not going to cover all the APIs.
We can do a full workshop
on performance APIs,
it's just an idea to get you up and
running with the basics, okay?
Let's say that the base of everything
that we will mention in this
section is under the performance option,
have you ever seen that one?
It's a global object
available in the context.
So if I open any website,
it can be my website,
let's go back to Frontend Museum,
let me close everything.
If I go to the console,
we can try the performance object.
So that object is actually like the root
of most of the performance APIs.
For example,
there we have a navigation option.
On that navigation, we can know
which type of navigation do we have.
One is actually a normal navigation,
so I just type the URL.
I can also have a BFCache navigation,
so it means the current navigation,
the user is going back, or the user went
back to our website, remember BFCache.
And also, I can see the redirect count, so
to get to this navigation,
how many redirects were necessary?
So over here also,
there is a performance.now
function that will give
you the current time.
But you say, the current time expressed in
which unit, which kind of weird, right?
If I refresh this, [COUGH] and
get performance.now(),
it's actually a small number.
It's expressed in milliseconds
since the zero of the timeline,
since I have started the navigation.
And you can use this to
measure things on your page,
to see how much time has passed since,
performance on that will give you,
and also it's high precision.
Technically, the precision
goes to the nanoseconds.
But yeah, it's a theory,
right, not the reality.
So it's milliseconds,
okay, it's much better
than doing this, new date().getTime, why?
Because this is, first, the amount of
milliseconds since 1st of January, 1970.
The precision is milliseconds only.
And also, you're creating an object
in memory, new date, looking for
memory, so
you're actually changing the observation.
That's not a good idea.
performance.now(), you can see it's
faster, it's actually native, and
it's accessing like
a high precision timer.
So on this performance object,
we have everything you need for
the performance APIs.
So we have already seen this, so
how to get the current timestamp,
we have already seen that.
By the way, the timeOrigin will
give you the timestamp for
the zero, if you need to convert
that into a normal date.
Also, you can get the redirectCount.
I already say that, and this is the kind
of kind of navigation you have,
it's a normal navigation,
it's a reload or it's a back forward.
And level 2,
level 2 means the version 2 of the API.
We do have a lot of timestamps, a lot.
So actually, what you see there is
all the steps of loading a web page.
And actually, you have lot of places
there where you can get the timestamp,
navigationStart, fetchStart.
When the SSL connection started,
it's called connectEnd.
When the HTTP request started,
that's requestStart.
When the CSS and JavaScript parsing
started, that's domInteractive, and so on.
And you can read the timestamp, so
you can actually design, if you want,
on the screen using Canvas, for
example, you can actually design
a waterfall chart just by gathering
the information from this API.
And again, with this,
you can make some decisions, for example.
So if you wanna, for example,
calculate time to first byte,
you get responseStart minus fetchStart,
that's time to first byte.
Anyway, time to first byte is
kind of at the backend time.
If you want download time, so
the downloading of the HTML,
responses and minus responseStart.
You want DOM load time,
domInteractive minus,
parsing and rendering time, and
you use that for your own purposes.
Does it make sense?
That's kind of the idea.
And page load time that
no one cares anymore,
okay, is domComplete minus fetchStart.